---
title: "A finite deformation Cosserat continuum model for uncured carbon fibre composites"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-06-24-Maxwell-Tipping-Cylinder
excerpt: 'A new three-dimensional, finite deformation Cosserat continuum model for the elastic response of uncuredcarbon fibre composites is presented. The new composite process model captures the bending contribution of bundles of fibres at the microscale within a mesoscale continuum description of a composite ply. This overcomes significiant challenges in modelling the deformation of uncured composite, which previously demonstrate serious pathological mesh dependence. A user-define element is provided for implementation of the new finite element in ABAQUS'
date: 2020-09-28
venue: 'Mechanics of Materials'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167663620306517'
citation: 'Shakhaei A. H, Erland S. and Dodwell T. J., A finite deformation Cosserat continuum model for uncured carbon fibre composites <i>Mechanics of Materials</i> <b>151</b>: 103611, 2020.'

---
A new three-dimensional, finite deformation Cosserat continuum model for the elastic response of uncuredcarbon fibre composites is presented. The new composite process model captures the bending contribution of bundles of fibres at the microscale within a mesoscale continuum description of a composite ply. This is achieved by introducing higher-order, independent rotational degrees of freedom into the continuumf ormulation. This paper demonstrates the inclusion of such mechanics is essential to accurately model various bending responses induced during typical composite manufacturing processes. This includes large deformationforming, finite strain consolidation and wrinkling (the formation of an unwanted defect). If such mechanics arenot included, the literature demonstrates the resulting finite element solutions have a pathological dependence on the mesh size. As a result, simulations require users to fit mesh-dependent material parameters, whichlimits confidence in their predictive capabilities. The Cosserat continuum, which can be seen as a form ofthe regularised continuum model, overcomes these challenges. In particular, this paper presents details of thefinite element formulation of the new continuum model within a nonlinear Taylor–Hood Cosserat Element. Implementation details of embedding this new element within the commercial codeAbaqusare given, alongsidea series of increasingly complex validation simulations. Notably, the examples include modelling the formationof internal fibre wrinkles and large deformation forming, which involves complex ply-to-ply and tool-to-ply contact. The paper concludes by describing: (1) how the elastic Cosserat model can be integrated intoexisting large deformation process models in the literature. The approach set out readily allows researchers toinclude the important effects of resin flow, cure kinetics and temperature distribution, not considered in thiscontribution, and (2) how it is envisaged that the ply scale model can be naturally scaled up to large laminatescale simulation using mathematical upscaling techniques.

[Download paper here](https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0167663620306517?token=030D13195F5EE1E796B9EA258975D75AD5CB9772DBF5A27EDB4848BC49A7AD0499E393D17E39BE3A3E60F3DB24F7E41B)

**Recommended citation**: Shakhaei A. H, Erland S. and Dodwell T. J., A finite deformation Cosserat continuum model for uncured carbon fibre composites, *Mechanics of Materials* **151**: 103611, 2020.